Al Green-White Christmas

Overall Grade-S

Nostalgia-4
Cheese-3
Sincerity-5
Uniqueness-4
Muzak-3

Special codes:
Positive Romantic Association
Christian Emphasis
Family Friendly

Side 1:
White Christmas
The Christmas Song
Winter Wonderland
I'll Be Home For Christmas
Jingle Bells

Side 2:
What Christmas Means to Me
Oh Holy Night
Silent Night
It Feels Like Christmas

<i>White Christmas</i> is Al Green's Christmas album from 1983.  The songs have since been reissued under different album titles with the tracks in a different order, and sometimes with the additional track "Glory, Glory" which isn't a Christmas song but does represent an earlier Al Green aesthetic that is more congruent with what most people would consider an Al Green sound, previously released on his <i>Full of Fire</i> in 1976.  It does make me curious what a more down-tempo, mid seventies R&B Al Green Christmas album would sound like (I don't know if that's a tightrope that could have been walked), but that later addition makes the collection a little more incoherent.

This later Al Green is a bit more uptempo than one would expect, with prominent synthesizers and disco strings as befits an R&B album in the early 80s, firmly locating this album in its time period.  These aspects serve to leaven his sound to make it a better pairing with "Jingle Bells" and "Winter Wonderland", and other standard Christmas repetoire tunes on Side 1 than might have been the case for the slower sexier Al Green of the previous decade.  While the album is of its time, it is so in the best sense of giving a nostalgic sense of setting rather than sounding like self-parody to a later listener.  Al Green provides his unique personality and a sense of feeling and depth to his vocals that transcend the arrangements without working against them.

The Side 2 songs are more affecting, with two original songs as bookends.  "What Christmas Means to Me" is more religious than anything found on the first side but still a little jaunty, sliding into the more intense, down-tempo "Oh Holy Night" and "Silent Night" which allows him more free rein to explore in his own style; these are the strongest tracks on the record in my opinion.  "It Feels Like Christmas" is almost a dance track, featuring the album's disco strings most prominently.

I sincerely vouch for the album's quality, but admit that there are personal factors coloring my view of the record.  It entered my collection by my late wife, and it took me a couple of listens to hear beyond the 80s nostalgia hand have it click for me.  Now, I cannot give it less than an S grade because I cannot imagine my Christmas music collection without it.  It is ironic that one of the aims of this project is to reduce the number of Christmas albums I have on the shelf, but re-listening to this for the review reminded me of the skip it developed recently on side one, so I sought out another copy for a replacement, but the replacement has so much surface noise on Side 2 that I've actually added a disc to my collection. Maybe someday I'll order a third copy to replace them both.
