John Gary-The John Gary Christmas Album

Overall Grade-D-

Nostalgia-5
Cheese-1
Sincerity-4
Uniqueness-3
Muzak-5

Special codes:
Pre-Boomer (Vergie)
Mind-Breaking
Unambitious

Side 1
The Christmas Song (Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire)
Winter Wonderland
Little Snow Girl
Medley: The First No(e-diaresis)l; O Come, All Ye Faithful; O Holy Night
Wintertime and Christmas Time
White Christmas

Side 2
Do You Hear What I Hear
Sweet Little Jesus Boy
I'll Be Home for Christmas
Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas
Medley: Hark! The Herald Angels Sing; O Little Town of Bethlehem; Silent Night

John Gary was an unfamiliar face and voice to me outside of this Christmas album, and I came by the album passed down from my grandmother to my mother to me. I do not recall this album being played when my mother would put a stack of records on the record player that dropped them one after the other.  A bit of internet searching reveals that he was a prolific B-list celebrity of the age, releasing tons of albums, appearing on variety shows, and even hosting one on network television for a season.  RealGoneMusic, in its CD reissue of this 1964 record, claims the album "went to #3 the year it came out and hit the Christmas charts for four straight years after that."  In research for this review, I have found comments across the internet and YouTube in particular uniformly praising John Gary.  Many people find emotional resonance with his style of singing, and cite him as a master of his craft and a natural talent (his 3 1/2 octave range is frequently mentioned). So when you read what I have to say about this album, listen for yourself and bear in mind that many many people (especially in the past) love John Gary's voice, singing style, and this album in particular.  I am not one of those people.

Danny Kaye was a frequent collaborator with John Gary, with John Gary playing the straight man for Kaye's more playful performing style, and the sound of this album seems like someone reaching for the Platonic Form of the Christmas Album circa 1964 without the special, individual elements to set it apart and make it engaging.  The arrangements of the songs do not call attention to themselves, and Gary's voice itself seems content with a workmanlike "perfection".  Every opportunity to show off vocally is not taken.  At each point near the end of a song where you expect the singer to reach for the stratosphere, Gary backs off. His overall approach seems controlled, to the point where the rare flourish sounds like a mistake.  This isn't the first rendition of "Sweet Little Jesus Boy" I've heard sung by a middle aged white guy with orchestral backing, but never have the lyrics in dialect sounded more out of place due to his delivery.  This album seems to aspire to be background music.  

The album nevertheless does get points for originality since it does include a couple of unusual songs for Christmas albums, and his voice is quite unusual.  In addition to a prominent, near-constant vibrato that is unsettling, his voice timbre is odd.  Bear in mind I'm only an amateur untrained choral singer, so my terminology may be off, but what I'm trying to get at is something real; I'd be glad if someone could listen to this album and correctly identify what I'm getting at.  In my choral training starting with high school, it was impressed upon me that proper technique starts with chest voice fed by breath support from the diaphragm to produce resonance in the singer's lowest voice register.  Higher notes can be sung by switching into other registers referred to as head voice and falsetto, which the singer experiences at coming from a different source and/or resonating in different places of the body, but which sounds thinner than the chest voice.  Part of developing as a singer is to support your voice in those higher registers (I've heard it called mixed voice) in such a way that switching to a higher register sounds seamless, like a continuation of chest voice and not reedy or thin.  John Gary's voice sounds like its "home" is the head voice register, with forays into a chest register or falsetto while keeping the character of head voice resonance, which sounds deeply strange to my ears.

You might have gotten the impression from the review up to this point that The John Gary Christmas Album isn't my cup of tea, but so far it's been stuff that can be rationally supported.  Beyond that I will try to relate my subjective psychological and even physiological response to the album.  It amazes me how a seemingly simple pop song can often quickly activate my lizard brain and produce a euphoric tingle in the back of my head.  This album produces an opposite effect on me.  It's similar to those maddening mosquito alarm devices that stores put up to discourage teenage loitering, which make me feel nauseated and wanting to close my bedroom door and lie down for a bit.  Added to that, I listened to the album fully twice through but remembered nothing about his voice--my brain is apparently John Gary-phobic: any John Gary you try to put on it slides right off.  I'm usually pretty good at reproducing voices in my mind's ear, and after listening I remembered my subjective evaluations of his singing, but I had no aural memory of his singing, which is distressing. For most of the review I was relying on past-Mike's impressions recorded in notes.  In the process of writing, I did refer back to a couple of John Gary songs out of context and this time bits did stay with me (I didn't like it, but it was a bit of a comfort to find my mental allergy wasn't quite as severe as I expected).  While unpleasant, the ability of this music to produce this response is interesting to me, but not interesting enough to secure a place on a shelf below my phonograph.
